EMAIL_SETUP_GUIDE.md, before:

# Email Setup Guide for Ayubo Cafe

This guide explains how to set up email functionality for password reset and user welcome emails.

## 📧 Current Status

**Development Mode:** Email functionality is currently set to **development mode**, which means:
- ✅ All email templates are ready
- ✅ Email functions are integrated into the app
- 📝 Reset links and credentials are logged to the browser console
- 📝 Alert dialogs show the information for easy copying
- ⚠️ **No actual emails are sent**

This is perfect for testing and development!

---

## 🚀 Email Features

### 1. Password Reset Email
- **Triggered by:** User clicking "Forgot Password" and entering email/username
- **Contains:** Secure reset link valid for 1 hour
- **Template:** Professional HTML email with branding

### 2. Welcome Email
- **Triggered by:** Owner creating a new user account
- **Contains:** Username and temporary password
- **Template:** Professional HTML email with login instructions

### 3. Password Changed Notification
- **Triggered by:** Owner resetting a user's password
- **Contains:** Security notification that password was changed
- **Template:** Professional HTML email with security information

---

## 🧪 Testing in Development Mode

### Test Password Reset:
1. Click "Forgot Password" on login screen
2. Enter your email or username
3. Click "Send Reset Link"
4. **Check the browser console** for the reset link
5. An alert dialog will also show the link
6. Copy the link and paste in browser to test password reset

### Test Welcome Email:
1. Login as owner (`owner` / `Sokian@1997`)
2. Navigate to "Users" tab
3. Click "Create User"
4. Fill in user details and password
5. Click "Create User"
6. **Check the browser console** for the credentials
7. An alert dialog will also show the credentials

### Test Password Changed Notification:
1. Login as owner
2. Navigate to "Users" tab
3. Click the 🔑 button next to a user
4. Reset their password
5. **Check the browser console** for the notification details

---

## 🔧 Production Setup Options

When you're ready to send actual emails in production, choose one of these options:

### **Option 1: Gmail SMTP (Recommended for Small Scale)**

#### Prerequisites:
- A Gmail account
- 2-Factor Authentication enabled

#### Setup Steps:

**Step 1: Enable 2FA on your Google Account**
1. Go to https://myaccount.google.com/security
2. Enable "2-Step Verification"

**Step 2: Generate an App Password**
1. Go to https://myaccount.google.com/apppasswords
2. Select "Mail" as the app
3. Select "Other" as the device and name it "Ayubo Cafe"
4. Click "Generate"
5. **Copy the 16-character password** (shown once!)

**Step 3: Update Your .env File**
1. Copy `env.example` to `.env`:
   ```bash
   cp env.example .env
   ```

2. Edit `.env` and update these values:
   ```env
   EMAIL_HOST=smtp.gmail.com
   EMAIL_PORT=587
   EMAIL_SECURE=false
   EMAIL_USER=your-email@gmail.com
   EMAIL_PASSWORD=your-16-char-app-password
   EMAIL_FROM=your-email@gmail.com
   EMAIL_ENABLED=true
   EMAIL_DEBUG=false
   APP_URL=https://yourdomain.com
   ```

**Step 4: Create a Backend API**

Since this is a client-side React app, you need a backend to send emails. Here are your options:

#### A) Supabase Edge Functions (Recommended)

Create a Supabase Edge Function:

```typescript
// supabase/functions/send-email/index.ts
import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std@0.168.0/http/server.ts"
import { SmtpClient } from "https://deno.land/x/smtp@v0.7.0/mod.ts"

serve(async (req) => {
  const { email, resetToken, userName, type } = await req.json()

  const client = new SmtpClient()

  await client.connectTLS({
    hostname: Deno.env.get("EMAIL_HOST"),
    port: parseInt(Deno.env.get("EMAIL_PORT") || "587"),
    username: Deno.env.get("EMAIL_USER"),
    password: Deno.env.get("EMAIL_PASSWORD"),
  })

  // Use email templates from src/utils/email.js
  // Send email based on type (password_reset, welcome, password_changed)

  await client.close()

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ success: true }), {
    headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
  })
})
```

Deploy:
```bash
supabase functions deploy send-email
```

Update `src/utils/email.js` to call your edge function instead of `/api/send-password-reset-email`.

#### B) Express.js Server

Create a simple Node.js server:

```javascript
// server/emailServer.js
import express from 'express';
import nodemailer from 'nodemailer';
import dotenv from 'dotenv';

dotenv.config();

const app = express();
app.use(express.json());

const transporter = nodemailer.createTransport({
  host: process.env.EMAIL_HOST,
  port: parseInt(process.env.EMAIL_PORT),
  secure: process.env.EMAIL_SECURE === 'true',
  auth: {
    user: process.env.EMAIL_USER,
    pass: process.env.EMAIL_PASSWORD,
  },
});

app.post('/api/send-password-reset-email', async (req, res) => {
  const { email, resetToken, userName } = req.body;
  
  // Import and use templates from src/utils/email.js
  // Send email using nodemailer
  
  res.json({ success: true });
});

app.listen(3001, () => {
  console.log('Email server running on port 3001');
});
```

Run:
```bash
node server/emailServer.js
```

Update `src/utils/email.js` to call `http://localhost:3001/api/send-password-reset-email`.

#### C) Netlify/Vercel Serverless Functions

Create a serverless function in your deployment platform and follow similar patterns.

---

### **Option 2: Third-Party Email Service (Recommended for Production)**

For production environments, consider using a dedicated email service:

#### SendGrid
- Free tier: 100 emails/day
- Easy API integration
- Great deliverability
- https://sendgrid.com

#### Mailgun
- Free tier: 5,000 emails/month
- Simple API
- Good analytics
- https://mailgun.com

#### AWS SES (Simple Email Service)
- Very low cost ($0.10 per 1,000 emails)
- High volume support
- Requires AWS account
- https://aws.amazon.com/ses

#### Resend
- Modern email API
- Simple pricing
- Great developer experience
- https://resend.com

**To use these services:**
1. Sign up for an account
2. Get your API key
3. Update `src/utils/email.js` to use their API instead of SMTP
4. Most provide client SDKs for easy integration

---

## 📝 Email Templates

All email templates are defined in `src/utils/email.js`:

- `getPasswordResetEmailTemplate()` - Password reset with button
- `getWelcomeEmailTemplate()` - Welcome with credentials
- `getPasswordChangedEmailTemplate()` - Security notification

These templates are:
- ✅ Fully responsive (mobile-friendly)
- ✅ Professional HTML design
- ✅ Include plain text fallback
- ✅ Match Ayubo Cafe branding (blue/green theme)
- ✅ Include security warnings

You can customize these templates by editing `src/utils/email.js`.

---

## 🔍 Troubleshooting

### Emails not appearing in console?
1. Open browser DevTools (F12)
2. Go to Console tab
3. Look for lines starting with `📧`
4. Check that `EMAIL_DEBUG=true` in your `.env`

### Gmail SMTP not working?
1. Ensure 2FA is enabled
2. Use App Password, NOT your regular password
3. Check that your Gmail account isn't blocking "less secure apps"
4. Try port 465 with `EMAIL_SECURE=true`

### Rate limiting?
- Gmail SMTP: 500 emails/day limit
- Consider a dedicated email service for high volume

---

## 📊 Monitoring

In production, monitor:
- Email delivery rates
- Bounce rates
- User complaints
- API quotas/limits

Add logging to track:
- Emails sent successfully
- Email failures
- Retry attempts

---

## 🔒 Security Best Practices

1. **Never commit .env files** - Already in `.gitignore`
2. **Use environment variables** for all sensitive data
3. **Rotate App Passwords** regularly
4. **Monitor for abuse** - implement rate limiting
5. **Use SPF/DKIM records** for better deliverability
6. **Log all email sends** to audit_logs table

---

## 📚 Next Steps

1. **Test in development** using console logging (current setup)
2. **Choose a production option** based on your scale
3. **Set up backend API** (Supabase Edge Functions recommended)
4. **Configure email service** with your chosen provider
5. **Update EMAIL_DEBUG=false** in production `.env`
6. **Test thoroughly** before going live
7. **Monitor delivery** and adjust as needed

---

## 💡 Tips

- **Development:** Keep `EMAIL_DEBUG=true` to avoid sending test emails
- **Staging:** Use a test email service like Mailtrap.io
- **Production:** Use a professional service like SendGrid or AWS SES
- **Testing:** Always test with real email addresses before launch
- **Deliverability:** Add SPF and DKIM DNS records for your domain

---

## 🆘 Need Help?

- Check Supabase documentation for Edge Functions
- Review Nodemailer documentation for SMTP setup
- Test emails with Mailtrap.io before production
- Consider hiring a DevOps engineer for production email setup

---

**Current Version:** 1.0  
**Last Updated:** October 19, 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Development Mode Active

Commit message:

fix: Remove exposed credentials and add missing env variables
- SECURITY: Reverted real credentials to placeholders

- Added missing EMAIL_ENABLED variable

- Added missing APP_URL variable

- Updated EMAIL_SETUP_GUIDE.md for consistency

- Added APP_URL documentation and examples

EMAIL_SETUP_GUIDE.md, after:

# Email Setup Guide for Ayubo Cafe

This guide explains how to set up email functionality for password reset and user welcome emails.

## 📧 Current Status

**Development Mode:** Email functionality is currently set to **development mode**, which means:
- ✅ All email templates are ready
- ✅ Email functions are integrated into the app
- 📝 Reset links and credentials are logged to the browser console
- 📝 Alert dialogs show the information for easy copying
- ⚠️ **No actual emails are sent**

This is perfect for testing and development!

---

## 🚀 Email Features

### 1. Password Reset Email
- **Triggered by:** User clicking "Forgot Password" and entering email/username
- **Contains:** Secure reset link valid for 1 hour
- **Template:** Professional HTML email with branding

### 2. Welcome Email
- **Triggered by:** Owner creating a new user account
- **Contains:** Username and temporary password
- **Template:** Professional HTML email with login instructions

### 3. Password Changed Notification
- **Triggered by:** Owner resetting a user's password
- **Contains:** Security notification that password was changed
- **Template:** Professional HTML email with security information

---

## 🧪 Testing in Development Mode

### Test Password Reset:
1. Click "Forgot Password" on login screen
2. Enter your email or username
3. Click "Send Reset Link"
4. **Check the browser console** for the reset link
5. An alert dialog will also show the link
6. Copy the link and paste in browser to test password reset

### Test Welcome Email:
1. Login as owner (`owner` / `Sokian@1997`)
2. Navigate to "Users" tab
3. Click "Create User"
4. Fill in user details and password
5. Click "Create User"
6. **Check the browser console** for the credentials
7. An alert dialog will also show the credentials

### Test Password Changed Notification:
1. Login as owner
2. Navigate to "Users" tab
3. Click the 🔑 button next to a user
4. Reset their password
5. **Check the browser console** for the notification details

---

## 🔧 Production Setup Options

When you're ready to send actual emails in production, choose one of these options:

### **Option 1: Gmail SMTP (Recommended for Small Scale)**

#### Prerequisites:
- A Gmail account
- 2-Factor Authentication enabled

#### Setup Steps:

**Step 1: Enable 2FA on your Google Account**
1. Go to https://myaccount.google.com/security
2. Enable "2-Step Verification"

**Step 2: Generate an App Password**
1. Go to https://myaccount.google.com/apppasswords
2. Select "Mail" as the app
3. Select "Other" as the device and name it "Ayubo Cafe"
4. Click "Generate"
5. **Copy the 16-character password** (shown once!)

**Step 3: Update Your .env File**
1. Copy `env.example` to `.env`:
   ```bash
   cp env.example .env
   ```

2. Edit `.env` and update these values:
   ```env
   # Email Configuration
   EMAIL_HOST=smtp.gmail.com
   EMAIL_PORT=587
   EMAIL_SECURE=false
   EMAIL_USER=your-email@gmail.com
   EMAIL_PASSWORD=your-16-char-app-password
   EMAIL_FROM="Ayubo Cafe <your-email@gmail.com>"
   EMAIL_DEBUG=false
   EMAIL_ENABLED=true
   
   # Application URL (for generating password reset links)
   # Development: http://localhost:3000
   # Production: https://yourdomain.com
   APP_URL=https://yourdomain.com
   ```

**Understanding the Variables:**
- `EMAIL_ENABLED`: Set to `true` to send real emails, `false` for console logging only
- `EMAIL_DEBUG`: Set to `true` to see full email content in console (even when EMAIL_ENABLED=true)
- `APP_URL`: Your application's public URL, used to generate clickable password reset links
  - **Development**: `http://localhost:3000` (or whatever port Vite assigns)
  - **Production**: Your actual domain like:
    - `https://ayubocafe.com`
    - `https://your-app.netlify.app`
    - `https://your-app.vercel.app`

**Step 4: Create a Backend API**

Since this is a client-side React app, you need a backend to send emails. Here are your options:

#### A) Supabase Edge Functions (Recommended)

Create a Supabase Edge Function:

```typescript
// supabase/functions/send-email/index.ts
import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std@0.168.0/http/server.ts"
import { SmtpClient } from "https://deno.land/x/smtp@v0.7.0/mod.ts"

serve(async (req) => {
  const { email, resetToken, userName, type } = await req.json()

  const client = new SmtpClient()

  await client.connectTLS({
    hostname: Deno.env.get("EMAIL_HOST"),
    port: parseInt(Deno.env.get("EMAIL_PORT") || "587"),
    username: Deno.env.get("EMAIL_USER"),
    password: Deno.env.get("EMAIL_PASSWORD"),
  })

  // Use email templates from src/utils/email.js
  // Send email based on type (password_reset, welcome, password_changed)

  await client.close()

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ success: true }), {
    headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
  })
})
```

Deploy:
```bash
supabase functions deploy send-email
```

Update `src/utils/email.js` to call your edge function instead of `/api/send-password-reset-email`.

#### B) Express.js Server

Create a simple Node.js server:

```javascript
// server/emailServer.js
import express from 'express';
import nodemailer from 'nodemailer';
import dotenv from 'dotenv';

dotenv.config();

const app = express();
app.use(express.json());

const transporter = nodemailer.createTransport({
  host: process.env.EMAIL_HOST,
  port: parseInt(process.env.EMAIL_PORT),
  secure: process.env.EMAIL_SECURE === 'true',
  auth: {
    user: process.env.EMAIL_USER,
    pass: process.env.EMAIL_PASSWORD,
  },
});

app.post('/api/send-password-reset-email', async (req, res) => {
  const { email, resetToken, userName } = req.body;
  
  // Import and use templates from src/utils/email.js
  // Send email using nodemailer
  
  res.json({ success: true });
});

app.listen(3001, () => {
  console.log('Email server running on port 3001');
});
```

Run:
```bash
node server/emailServer.js
```

Update `src/utils/email.js` to call `http://localhost:3001/api/send-password-reset-email`.

#### C) Netlify/Vercel Serverless Functions

Create a serverless function in your deployment platform and follow similar patterns.

---

### **Option 2: Third-Party Email Service (Recommended for Production)**

For production environments, consider using a dedicated email service:

#### SendGrid
- Free tier: 100 emails/day
- Easy API integration
- Great deliverability
- https://sendgrid.com

#### Mailgun
- Free tier: 5,000 emails/month
- Simple API
- Good analytics
- https://mailgun.com

#### AWS SES (Simple Email Service)
- Very low cost ($0.10 per 1,000 emails)
- High volume support
- Requires AWS account
- https://aws.amazon.com/ses

#### Resend
- Modern email API
- Simple pricing
- Great developer experience
- https://resend.com

**To use these services:**
1. Sign up for an account
2. Get your API key
3. Update `src/utils/email.js` to use their API instead of SMTP
4. Most provide client SDKs for easy integration

---

## 📝 Email Templates

All email templates are defined in `src/utils/email.js`:

- `getPasswordResetEmailTemplate()` - Password reset with button
- `getWelcomeEmailTemplate()` - Welcome with credentials
- `getPasswordChangedEmailTemplate()` - Security notification

These templates are:
- ✅ Fully responsive (mobile-friendly)
- ✅ Professional HTML design
- ✅ Include plain text fallback
- ✅ Match Ayubo Cafe branding (blue/green theme)
- ✅ Include security warnings

You can customize these templates by editing `src/utils/email.js`.

---

## 🔍 Troubleshooting

### Emails not appearing in console?
1. Open browser DevTools (F12)
2. Go to Console tab
3. Look for lines starting with `📧`
4. Check that `EMAIL_DEBUG=true` in your `.env`

### Gmail SMTP not working?
1. Ensure 2FA is enabled
2. Use App Password, NOT your regular password
3. Check that your Gmail account isn't blocking "less secure apps"
4. Try port 465 with `EMAIL_SECURE=true`

### Rate limiting?
- Gmail SMTP: 500 emails/day limit
- Consider a dedicated email service for high volume

---

## 📊 Monitoring

In production, monitor:
- Email delivery rates
- Bounce rates
- User complaints
- API quotas/limits

Add logging to track:
- Emails sent successfully
- Email failures
- Retry attempts

---

## 🔒 Security Best Practices

1. **Never commit .env files** - Already in `.gitignore`
2. **Use environment variables** for all sensitive data
3. **Rotate App Passwords** regularly
4. **Monitor for abuse** - implement rate limiting
5. **Use SPF/DKIM records** for better deliverability
6. **Log all email sends** to audit_logs table

---

## 📚 Next Steps

1. **Test in development** using console logging (current setup)
2. **Choose a production option** based on your scale
3. **Set up backend API** (Supabase Edge Functions recommended)
4. **Configure email service** with your chosen provider
5. **Update EMAIL_DEBUG=false** in production `.env`
6. **Test thoroughly** before going live
7. **Monitor delivery** and adjust as needed

---

## 💡 Tips

- **Development:** Keep `EMAIL_DEBUG=true` to avoid sending test emails
- **Staging:** Use a test email service like Mailtrap.io
- **Production:** Use a professional service like SendGrid or AWS SES
- **Testing:** Always test with real email addresses before launch
- **Deliverability:** Add SPF and DKIM DNS records for your domain

---

## 🆘 Need Help?

- Check Supabase documentation for Edge Functions
- Review Nodemailer documentation for SMTP setup
- Test emails with Mailtrap.io before production
- Consider hiring a DevOps engineer for production email setup

---

**Current Version:** 1.0  
**Last Updated:** October 19, 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Development Mode Active
